docs(api): runtime parameters in Python API 2.18 (#14677)
OpenTrons/opentrons-api: api/docs/v2/parameters/choosing.rst

:og:description: Advice on choosing effective parameters in Opentrons Python protocols.

.. _good-rtps:

************************
Choosing Good Parameters
************************

The first decision you need to make when adding parameters to your protocol is "What should be parameterized?" Your goals in adding parameters should be the following:

1. **Add flexibility.** Accommodate changes from run to run or from lab to lab.
2. **Work efficiently.** Don't burden run setup with too many choices or confusing options.
3. **Avoid errors.** Ensure that every combination of parameters produces an analyzable, runnable protocol.

Build on a Task
===============

Consider what scientific task is at the heart of your protocol, and build parameters that contribute to, rather than diverge from it.

> For example, it makes sense to add a parameter for number of samples to a protocol that uses a particular DNA prep reagent kit. But it wouldn't make sense to add a parameter for *which reagent kit* to use for DNA prep. That kind of parameter would affect so many aspects of the protocol that it would make more sense to maintain two protocols, one for each kit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, it makes sense to add a parameter for number of samples to a protocol that uses a particular DNA prep reagent kit. But it wouldn't make sense to add a parameter for *which reagent kit* to use for DNA prep. That kind of parameter would affect so many aspects of the protocol that it would make more sense to maintain a separate protocol for each kit.
```

Also consider how a small number of parameters can combine to produce many useful outputs. Take the serial dilution task from the :ref:`tutorial` as an example. We could add just three parameters to it: number of dilutions, dilution factor, and number of rows. Now that single protocol can produce a whole plate that gradually dilutes, a 2×4 grid that rapidly dilutes, and *thousands* of other combinations.

The trick to choosing good parameters is reasoning through the choices the protocol's users may make. If any of them lead to nonsensical outcomes or errors, adjust the parameters — or how your protocol :ref:`uses parameter values <using-rtp>` — to avoid those situations.

Consider Contradictions
=======================

Here's a common time-saving use of parameters: your protocol requires a 1-channel pipette and an 8-channel pipette, but it doesn't matter which mount they're attached to. Without parameters, you would have to assign the mounts in your protocol. Then if the robot is set up in the reverse configuration, you'd have to either physically swap the pipettes or modify your protocol.

> One way to get this information is to ask which mount the 1-channel pipette is on, and which pipette the 8-channel pipette is on. But if a user answers "left" to both questions — even by accident — the API will raise an error, because you can't load two pipettes on a single mount. It's no better to flip things around by asking which pipette is on the left mount, and which pipette is on the right mount. Now the user can say that both mounts have a 1-channel pipette. This is even more dangerous, because it *might not* raise any errors in analysis. The protocol could run "successfully" on a robot with two 1-channel pipettes, but produce completely unintended results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way to get this information is to ask which mount the 1-channel pipette is on, and which mount the 8-channel pipette is on. But if a user answers "left" to both questions — even by accident — the API will raise an error, because you can't load two pipettes on a single mount. It's no better to flip things around by asking which pipette is on the left mount, and which pipette is on the right mount. Now the user can say that both mounts have a 1-channel pipette. This is even more dangerous, because it *might not* raise any errors in analysis. The protocol could run "successfully" on a robot with two 1-channel pipettes, but produce completely unintended results.
```

- It only requires the user to answer one question instead of two.
- The :ref:`phrasing of the question and answer <rtp-style>` makes it clear that the protocol requires exactly one of each pipette type.

Set Boundaries
==============

Numerical parameters support minimum and maximum values, which you should set to avoid incorrect inputs that are outside of your protocol's possibile actions.

Consider our earlier example of parameterizing serial dilution. Each of the three numerical parameters have logical upper and lower bounds, which we need to enforce to get sensible results.

- *Number of dilutions* must be between 0 and 11 on a 96-well plate. And it may make sense to require at least 1 dilution.
- *Dilution factor* is a ratio, which we can express as a decimal number that must be between 0 and 1.
- *Number of rows* must be between 1 and 8 on a 96-well plate.

What if you wanted to perform a dilution with 20 repetitions? It's possible with two 96-well plates, or with a 384-well plate. You could set the maximum for the number of dilutions to 24 and allow for these possibilities — either switching the plate type or loading an additional plate based on the provided value. 

> But what if the user wanted to do just 8 repetitions on a 384-well plate? That would require an additional parameter, an additional choice by the user, and additional logic in your protocol code. It's up to you as the protocol author to decide if adding more parameters adds unnecessary complexity. It may well be better to have two or three protocols that each work simply and efficiently.

Reviewer 2: First, wow! This whole `choosing.rst` file is great. It's clear, precise, a great piece of writing.

My one observation here is with the very last sentence. It seems to pull its punches. I'm reading all this and coming up to the end, expecting the message about simplicity to be hammered home. You still get a payoff, but the message about simplicity comes at the very end and feels softer by its positioning. "Simple" should come earlier in the sentence. Something like, "It may be better to work with two or three simple protocols than with a large multi-parameter protocol."

And if we do want to discourage potentially big and unwieldy protocols, make the end slightly more opinionated than "It may well be." For example, "Sometimes it's better to work with a few simple protocols rather than one that's long and complex."

Anyway, all of this is good as I noted. This very last sentence just kinda felt off.
